Narrator: Now we're going
to use array—
makeBeat() with arrays
and array operations
like slicing and concatenation
in order to take a beat
and vary it gradually
as we repeat it over time.
So we have a drumSounds array
here with six different
drum sounds in it
and a beatString.
And we'll use those together
with a makeBeat()
function down here.
You may remember
that if we call makeBeat()
with its first argument
being in array of sounds,
as opposed to a single sound,
that then in the beatString
we can use different numbers
to refer to different indexes
within the array.
So if we look
at the first character here,
the 5, that is referring
to index 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
of the array, the snare drum.
If we look here
at the 1 character
in our beatString,
that's referring to index 0, 1,
the closed hi-hat sound within
in the drumSounds array.
So our makeBeat() is inside
of a for loop here,
and so every measure
we're calling makeBeat() again
to place the beatString
using that drums sounds array,
on track 1
at the particular measure.
And there's something else
inside of this for loop too,
though,
which is this "if" statement.
The Boolean expression
inside of this if statement
is "if measure mod 4 equals 0."
So mod is taking the remainder.
When you divide two numbers,
what is the remainder
that comes if you are
dividing two integers?
And so let's look
at how this works in this case.
So if measure is 1,
and 1 mod 4,
well 1 doesn't divide
evenly into 4.
So the remainder here is 1.
That's not equal to 0,
so the if statement is false.
The next time through, 2 mod 4,
well that also— 2 doesn't divide
evenly into 4,
so that gives us 2.
The next time measure 3,
well 3 mod 4 also doesn't
divide evenly so we get a 3.
Then measure 4, 4 mod 4, 4 does
divide evenly into itself,
so our remainder here is 0.
So this if statement,
the Boolean expression is true,
and so the block of code
inside of the if statement
will execute
when measure equals 4.
When measure equals 5,
well 5 mod 4, again,
doesn't divide evenly,
we get a remainder of 1
and so on.
But when we get to 8,
well 8 mod 4, that does—
eight does divide evenly
by four.
So 8 mod 4 is 0
so that's true again.
And we'll see that's true again
when measures 12, 16, 20, 24,
and so on and so forth.
So every fourth measure
the Boolean expression
of the if statement will be true
and the code block will execute.
So now let's look
at the code block itself
and try to understand
what's going on
with the statements
inside of the code block.
First, we're defining a new
variable, arrLength,
to be the length of drumSounds,
which is 6.
We count it at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Then, we're creating
a new array called lastSound.
LastSound is a slice operation
on the drumSounds array
going from arrLength-1
to arrLength.
So in other words,
from 6 minus 1, so 5 to 6.
And that is going
to be 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
That's simply the last element
in the array: OS_SNARE01.
The next list we're defining
is called—
the next array we're defining
is called allButLastSound.
And that is a slice
of drumSounds
from 0 through 2,
arrLength - 1.
So that's from 0
to 6 minus 1 of 5.
So that's going
to be 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
and then stops
when it gets to 5.
So that's basically everything
except for the last element
in the array.
So now we're going to do
a concatenation operation.
So we're redefining
drumSounds to the lastSound,
that's this,
concatenated
with allButLastSound,
which is everything else.
So we once again have an array
with six sounds in it.
But if we look, OS_SNARE01,
that was the last element
in the array
and now it's the first element
in the array.
So every time we run the code
inside the if statement,
we basically cut off
the last element of the array
and we push it to the front,
in front of everything else.
And so what that ends up
doing for us is
it then you have 5
or any of these other numbers
are now referring
to the same index of the array,
but they are referring
to a different sound
because the placement
of the sounds within that array
have moved.
So we end up
with the same rhythm
represented by the beatString,
but the specific sounds
in the different parts
of that rhythm have changed.
So every four measures
the drum beat changes,
the fundamental rhythm
stays the same,
but the sounds
and the way those sounds are
realizing that rhythm evolve.
So we get something for these
computational structures
that creates a drum beat
that is always changing
and evolving to somehow
staying the same in its essence.
So let's listen to it now.
[electronic drum beats]